LUMPY/README.md, before:

# LUMPY pipeline on hoffman2
## Overview
LUMPY is based upon a general probabilistic representation of an SV breakpoint that allows any number of alignment signals to be integrated into a single discovery process [1]. It can integrate multiple types of signals from a sample (as illustrated in A) and integreat a single signal types from multiple samples (as illustrated in B). 
![Integrate three signals from a sample](https://github.com/hjzhou988/Genome-STRiP-pipeline/blob/master/LUMPY/LUMPY_A.png )
![Integrate a single signal types from multiple samples](https://github.com/hjzhou988/Genome-STRiP-pipeline/blob/master/LUMPY/LUMPY_B.png)
In scenario A, LUMPY has its own Read-Pair module and Split-Read module, which requires the "discordant read pair" bam file and "split read" bam file as inputs. The Generic module needs the output from other algorithms or known variants. The output from other algorithms or known variants need to be convert to "bedpe" format by the script "vcfToBedpe" or "cnvanator_to_bedpes.py" (data generated by CNVnator) on LUMPY github. 
In scenario B, multiple samples (typically a trio) are used as inputs for one LUMPY run.

In the pipeline described here, the majory part is directly from [Colin Farrell's work](https://github.com/NuttyLogic/SV_Pipeline), with some modifications and annotations. Install LUMPY from its github page https://github.com/arq5x/lumpy-sv. 

## Single sample SV calling by traditional LUMPY
Traditional LUMPY example script is in "lumpy_variants_HZ.sh" and "lumpy_submission_shell_HZ.sh". 
lumpyexpress can also be used, as long as "-P" flag is on (It generates probability curves, which is required by the l_merge.py, in the VCF file). (I have not tested lumpyexpress -P yet)

## Sort and merge single-sample VCFs
Use the LUMPY provided l_sort.py and l_merge.py scripts to sort and merge all single-sample VCF together. 
l_sort.py needs all single-sample VCFs as input. Its output is a multi-sample VCF contains all the sites sorted. 
l_merge.py needs the output from l_sort.py. It merges similar sites based on the boarder probabilities. 
It consumes a lot of memory. The job submission script uses 33G memory for l_merge.py and a little less for l_sort.py.

## Remove BND calls
LUMPY generates a lot of BND calls. For now, we ignore them and delete them from the multisample VCF. Colin's script of "bnd_remover.py" is used. 
```
python2 bnd_remover_lumpy.py -i LUMPY.vcf -o LUMPY.bnd_rm.vcf -d path_to_LUMPYvcf/
```

## Genotyping
[SVTyper](https://github.com/hall-lab/svtyper) is used to genotype the LUMPY result. The BND removed multi-sample VCF from LUMPY is used as input. The SVTyper program genotypes one sample at a time. The output can be merged by the script "vcf_paste.py" from SVTyper github. It should then be sorted by vcf-sort, so that it is ready for Mendelian error detection (My current implementation cannot detect duplicated markers if the vcf is not sorted). 
* Install SVTyper according to SVTyper github page. 
* Run "sv_typer_submission_shell.HZ.sh" (bundled with svtyper_shell.HZ.sh) in the SVTyper folder (scripts based on Colin's work). This step generates single-sample genotype VCF for all samples. 
* Merge all single-sample genotype VCF using "vcf_paste.py" (SVTyper_merge.job)
* Sort the merged VCF using vcf-sort
```
module load vcftools
vcf-sort -c svtyper.combined.vcf > svtyper.combined.sorted.vcf
```
* Remove the sites that are ./. in all samples. "RemoveMissingGTsites.py"
```
python3 RemoveMissingGTsites.py -i svtyper.combined.sorted.vcf -o svtyper.combined.sorted.MissingGT_rm.vcf
```

## Regions to exclude
* The LUMPY paper has its own regions to exclude, based on certain regions having abnormally high coverage (https://github.com/hall-lab/speedseq/blob/master/annotations/ceph18.b37.lumpy.exclude.2014-01-15.bed). 
* The LUMPY github also recommends the exclusion region published by Heng Li (https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btu356)
* The exclusion regions can be used either in the LUMPY running step. Otherwise you can use "bedtools intersect" function to delete the sites that intersect with the exclusion regions. 
* I used the 100-mer mappability mask from GenomeSTRiP reference bundle to filter out the sites. "/u/home/a/alden/eeskin2/bipolar_sv/svtoolkit/reference/Homo_sapiens_assembly19.mask.101.fasta.bed"
* VDJ recombination regions should also be excluded. "Homo_sapiens_assembly19.vdjregions.bed"
```
. /u/local/Modules/default/init/modules.sh
module load bedtools
bedtools intersect -header -v -a Input.vcf -b ExcludeRegions.bed > Input.excluded.vcf
bedtools intersect -header -v -a Input.excluded.vcf -b immunoglobulin.bed > Input.excluded.vdj_removed.vcf
```

[1] Layer, Ryan M., et al. "LUMPY: a probabilistic framework for structural variant discovery." Genome biology 15.6 (2014): R84.

Commit message:

add svtools to lumpy readme

LUMPY/README.md, after:

# LUMPY pipeline on hoffman2
## Overview
LUMPY is based upon a general probabilistic representation of an SV breakpoint that allows any number of alignment signals to be integrated into a single discovery process [1]. It can integrate multiple types of signals from a sample (as illustrated in A) and integreat a single signal types from multiple samples (as illustrated in B). 
![Integrate three signals from a sample](https://github.com/hjzhou988/Genome-STRiP-pipeline/blob/master/LUMPY/LUMPY_A.png )
![Integrate a single signal types from multiple samples](https://github.com/hjzhou988/Genome-STRiP-pipeline/blob/master/LUMPY/LUMPY_B.png)
In scenario A, LUMPY has its own Read-Pair module and Split-Read module, which requires the "discordant read pair" bam file and "split read" bam file as inputs. The Generic module needs the output from other algorithms or known variants. The output from other algorithms or known variants need to be convert to "bedpe" format by the script "vcfToBedpe" or "cnvanator_to_bedpes.py" (data generated by CNVnator) on LUMPY github. 
In scenario B, multiple samples (typically a trio) are used as inputs for one LUMPY run.

In the pipeline described here, the majory part is directly from [Colin Farrell's work](https://github.com/NuttyLogic/SV_Pipeline), with some modifications and annotations. Install LUMPY from its github page https://github.com/arq5x/lumpy-sv.  However, developers from the same lab also developed [svtools](https://github.com/hall-lab/svtools), which integrate LUMPY vcf files with SVTypter, CNVnator, and further pruning of the results. This supposedly removes the redundancy and lowers Mendel error. Checking on the svtools is worth a try. 

## Single sample SV calling by traditional LUMPY
Traditional LUMPY example script is in "lumpy_variants_HZ.sh" and "lumpy_submission_shell_HZ.sh". 
lumpyexpress can also be used, as long as "-P" flag is on (It generates probability curves, which is required by the l_merge.py, in the VCF file). (I have not tested lumpyexpress -P yet)

## Sort and merge single-sample VCFs
Use the LUMPY provided l_sort.py and l_merge.py scripts to sort and merge all single-sample VCF together. 
l_sort.py needs all single-sample VCFs as input. Its output is a multi-sample VCF contains all the sites sorted. 
l_merge.py needs the output from l_sort.py. It merges similar sites based on the boarder probabilities. 
It consumes a lot of memory. The job submission script uses 33G memory for l_merge.py and a little less for l_sort.py.

## Remove BND calls
LUMPY generates a lot of BND calls. For now, we ignore them and delete them from the multisample VCF. Colin's script of "bnd_remover.py" is used. 
```
python2 bnd_remover_lumpy.py -i LUMPY.vcf -o LUMPY.bnd_rm.vcf -d path_to_LUMPYvcf/
```

## Genotyping
[SVTyper](https://github.com/hall-lab/svtyper) is used to genotype the LUMPY result. The BND removed multi-sample VCF from LUMPY is used as input. The SVTyper program genotypes one sample at a time. The output can be merged by the script "vcf_paste.py" from SVTyper github. It should then be sorted by vcf-sort, so that it is ready for Mendelian error detection (My current implementation cannot detect duplicated markers if the vcf is not sorted). 
* Install SVTyper according to SVTyper github page. 
* Run "sv_typer_submission_shell.HZ.sh" (bundled with svtyper_shell.HZ.sh) in the SVTyper folder (scripts based on Colin's work). This step generates single-sample genotype VCF for all samples. 
* Merge all single-sample genotype VCF using "vcf_paste.py" (SVTyper_merge.job)
* Sort the merged VCF using vcf-sort
```
module load vcftools
vcf-sort -c svtyper.combined.vcf > svtyper.combined.sorted.vcf
```
* Remove the sites that are ./. in all samples. "RemoveMissingGTsites.py"
```
python3 RemoveMissingGTsites.py -i svtyper.combined.sorted.vcf -o svtyper.combined.sorted.MissingGT_rm.vcf
```

## Regions to exclude
* The LUMPY paper has its own regions to exclude, based on certain regions having abnormally high coverage (https://github.com/hall-lab/speedseq/blob/master/annotations/ceph18.b37.lumpy.exclude.2014-01-15.bed). 
* The LUMPY github also recommends the exclusion region published by Heng Li (https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btu356)
* The exclusion regions can be used either in the LUMPY running step. Otherwise you can use "bedtools intersect" function to delete the sites that intersect with the exclusion regions. 
* I used the 100-mer mappability mask from GenomeSTRiP reference bundle to filter out the sites. "/u/home/a/alden/eeskin2/bipolar_sv/svtoolkit/reference/Homo_sapiens_assembly19.mask.101.fasta.bed"
* VDJ recombination regions should also be excluded. "Homo_sapiens_assembly19.vdjregions.bed"
```
. /u/local/Modules/default/init/modules.sh
module load bedtools
bedtools intersect -header -v -a Input.vcf -b ExcludeRegions.bed > Input.excluded.vcf
bedtools intersect -header -v -a Input.excluded.vcf -b immunoglobulin.bed > Input.excluded.vdj_removed.vcf
```

[1] Layer, Ryan M., et al. "LUMPY: a probabilistic framework for structural variant discovery." Genome biology 15.6 (2014): R84.
